Jsimmonds get started subbranch (#543)
osisoft/OCS-Docs: content/add-organize-data/organize-data/stream-views/stream-views-concept.md

---
uid: ccStreamviews
---

# Stream views

> A stream view is a logical overlay that enables you to customize your view of streaming data so it is most useful to you. While you cannot change the properties of types, stream views enable you to create a view of a stream so it appears as if you had changed the type. You create a stream view by choosing a source and target type, and then defining   mappings between the properties of the two types. The source type is the type associated with the stream. The target type includes the properties you want to include in the stream view. In effect, you can remove, rename, or add properties without altering the original stream type. 

Reviewer: Minor: Extra space between `defining` and `mappings`

---
uid: ccStreamviews
---

# Stream views

> A stream view is essentially a logical overlay that enables you to view streaming data in a way that is most useful to you. While you cannot actually change the properties of types themselves, stream views enable you to create a view of a selected stream that appears as if you had changed the type on which it is based. You create a stream view by choosing a source and target type, and then creating a set of mappings between the properties of the two types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A stream view is a logical overlay that enables you to view streaming data in a way that is most useful to you. While you cannot actually change the properties of types themselves, stream views enable you to create a view of a selected stream that appears as if you had changed the type on which it is based. You create a stream view by choosing a source and target type, and then creating a set of mappings between the properties of the two types.
```

Reviewer: 👍

> A stream view serves as a mapping between the true underlying type and the type in the stream view, enabling you to in effect remove, rename, or add properties on your original stream data. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A stream view maps the underlying type to the type in the stream view, enabling you to remove, rename, or add properties without altering the original stream type.
```
I'm not sure I got this right.

Author: I am thinking of this: 
A stream view maps the underlying type to the type in the stream view, enabling you to in effect remove, rename, or add properties without altering the original stream type.

Reviewer: Maybe to clarify a bit, `A stream view maps the underlying *source* type to the *target type* in the stream view...`
Otherwise this does seem a bit more clear.

Author: Done - thanks!

Using a stream view on data retrieval affects only the data retrieved, and does not alter the original source data. 

For example, a process engineer and a maintenance technician might want to see different data that exists in the same stream. With stream views you can change the appearance of the data stream to meet the needs of both users without changing the original data. In addition, stream views can perform other functions, such as converting units of measure and changing names so the terminology that is displayed is more appropriate for a particular audience.

OCS provides a graphical interface for setting up stream views, or you can use REST APIs to define stream views programmatically. If you are using the .NET framework, OSIsoft also offers client libraries to help you create and use stream views.
For information about setting up a stream view, see [Get started with stream views](xref:gsStreamviews).
For more information about types, see [Types](xref:sdsTypes).

> NOTE: In rare cases, you might want to use a stream view to permanently change a stream's type. For more information, see [Streams](https://ocs-docs.osisoft.com/Content_Portal/Documentation/SequentialDataStore/SDS_Streams.html#update-stream-type).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** In rare cases, you might want to use a stream view to permanently change a stream's type. For more information, see [Streams](https://ocs-docs.osisoft.com/Content_Portal/Documentation/SequentialDataStore/SDS_Streams.html#update-stream-type).
```

> NOTE: In rare cases, you might want to use a stream view to permanently change a stream's type. For more information, see [Streams](https://ocs-docs.osisoft.com/Content_Portal/Documentation/SequentialDataStore/SDS_Streams.html#update-stream-type).

Reviewer 2: Joyce,
Just an FYI. Consistency editors will ask you to create a separate para for the Note and put Note: in bold.

> NOTE: In rare cases, you might want to use a stream view to permanently change a stream's type. For more information, see [Streams](https://ocs-docs.osisoft.com/Content_Portal/Documentation/SequentialDataStore/SDS_Streams.html#update-stream-type).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** In rare cases, you might want to use a stream view to permanently change a stream's type. For more information, see [Streams](https://ocs-docs.osisoft.com/Content_Portal/Documentation/SequentialDataStore/SDS_Streams.html#update-stream-type).
```

### <a name="streamviews-pi-server"></a>PI Server counterpart

> While there is no direct counterpart for stream views in PI Server, the closest analog is the PI Point Data Reference in PI AF. Like stream views, PI Point Data References allow you to give a friendly name and unit of measure on top of an existing PI Point, effectively viewing it in a different way. PI Point Data References do not alter the underlying PI Point in any way, just as stream views do not change the source stream or type in the Sequential Data Store.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While there is no direct counterpart for stream views in PI Server, the closest analog is the PI Point Data Reference in PI AF. Like stream views, PI Point Data References allow you to give a friendly name and unit of measure on top of an existing PI point, effectively viewing it in a different way. PI Point Data References do not alter the underlying PI point, just as stream views do not change the source stream or type in the Sequential Data Store.
```
Joyce, is "PI Point Data Reference" capitalized this way?

### <a name="streamviews-bestpractices"></a>Stream views best practices

> OSIsoft recommends the following best practices when working with stream views.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OSIsoft recommends the following best practices when working with stream views:
```
Joyce, the new MS Style Guide has us use colons even for complete sentences if they precede a list. This is different from what I'm accustomed to doing too.

1. Stream views can be useful when you are using PI to OCS. PI to OCS creates streams with many additional flags, for example `IsQuestionable`, `IsSubstituted`, and `IsAnnotated`. 
You can use stream views to limit these properties or to give them a more meaningful name.

> 1. When you use a stream view to map to another type, use caution when not all properties in the target type are able to be mapped. Properties that are not mapped will be returned with their default value in the target type. For example, if the target type contains a double property that is not mapped, data transformation will give that property the value of `0`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Use caution when a stream view is used to map to another type, and there are properties in the target type that cannot be mapped. Unmapped properties are returned with their default value in the target type. For example, if the target type contains a double property that is not mapped, data transformation gives that property the value of `0`.
```
Doug, is the situation you're describing here one where you are adding a type in the target type that cannot be mapped to a type in the source type?

Reviewer: Let's say you have a source type with Timestamp and Pressure, and you use a stream view to map to a type with Timestamp, Pressure, and Temperature. If Temperature is a double, it will always be returned with the value `0`. That is the situation I'm warning about; the true value isn't 0, there's just nothing in the source for it to map to.

Author: Thanks, Doug! I am changing the trext to this:
When you use a stream view to map to another type, use caution when not all properties in the target type are able to be mapped from the source. Properties that are not mapped return their default value in the target type. For example, if the target type contains a double property that is not mapped, data transformation gives that property a value of `0`.
For example, assume you have a source type with two properties, Timestamp and Pressure, and you use a stream view to map to a type with the properties Timestamp, Pressure, and Temperature. If Temperature is of data type double, a value of 0 (zero) is always returned for it, because it cannot be mapped from the source type.

> 1. Stream views are the only way to change a stream's underlying type, as described in [Streams](https://ocs-docs.osisoft.com/Content_Portal/Documentation/SequentialDataStore/SDS_Streams.html#update-stream-type). CAUTION: Unmapped source properties will be lost after the update. Unmapped target properties will be set to their default value for all existing events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Stream views are the only way to change a stream's underlying type, as described in [Streams](https://ocs-docs.osisoft.com/Content_Portal/Documentation/SequentialDataStore/SDS_Streams.html#update-stream-type). 

**Caution:** Unmapped source properties will be lost after the update. Unmapped target properties will be set to their default value for all existing events.
```
Doug, do you mean that the unmapped source properties are permanently removed from the target type and cannot be added later?

Reviewer: What I mean is that they are removed from the stream data. If you have a mapping (similar to the above) where the source type has Timestamp, Pressure, and Temperature, and you map it via stream view to a type with Timestamp, Pressure, and Depth, you might only be able to map Timestamp and Pressure. In that case, if you change the underlying type, the source data for the "Temperature" field would be completely lost, and the existing events would be given a value of `0` for the new "Depth" property which didn't exist on the stream before.

Author: Thanks, Doug! I am changing the text to this:
Any unmapped source properties are removed from the stream data. Unmapped target properties are set to their default value for all existing events. For example, if you have a mapping where the source type has the properties Timestamp, Pressure, and Temperature, and you use a stream view to map to a type with the properties Timestamp, Pressure, and Depth, you might only be able to map Timestamp and Pressure. In that case, if you permanently change the underlying type, the source data for the Temperature field would be lost, and the existing events would be given a value of 0 for the new Depth property, which did not exist on the stream before.
